Some one gives you a model. It runs. what happens next?

Since I like, the reader, I list below the mistakes
I made when reasoning about models.  I do this since
a fool learns from their own mistakes, a wise
persons learns from the mistakes of others.

Depends on how old and how wise you are. In the
interest of full disclosure, in my time I've done
all the following, specifically when i was not very
old and i was very unwise.

Very young and not wise, run it for all combinations
of inputs and look at the results. So slow!

Very young and a little wiser, run it on some cpu
cloud. lots of output, lots of variance. lots of
energy consumption (usa data center = 2% of
national. if 50 of your buddies like what you do and
they all jump in after you, no power left for
toasters or TVs)

if uncertainty, conclusions are from a space of possibilities

if environmental noise, then can't say

if slow model, can't run them all so solutions
dependent on inputs

if model learned from data, biased by model
generation process- the data used to build the
model, the search basis of the learner, etc etc

and some models are over elaborated: too complex. Illusionary 

if over constrainted, no solution

if multi-goal, many solutions. moea rave

little older- gaze it to prove properties. advocates
of formal analysis or _better_ languages. proponents
of the sapir-whorf hypothesis (many old school cs
geeks are- in the era of flipping switches to
control the gates on the hardware, the geeks dreamed
of programming the machines in a language closer to
the task at hand. guy who did apl. domain specific
languages.

olde school se people: look at it and reason about it

only works 100% for very small models. spend more
time designing the language and the compilers and
writing the manuals than running the models.  and
you might miss something. limits to human cognitive
reasoning (wikipeia). the population example from
that book i used in my thesis

maybe a little wiser- get some output and show it to
experts. limits to reflection valerdi.

older still, von neumann, turing goedel. thought is
an experimental science

XXX give up abandon models? nope its what we do. if np
other reasons, need to

-- share insights with newbies

-- satisfy legislative requirements

-- justify decisions in count of law

separate decisions from outcomes
- good decisions vs good outcomes
